# Feature 7: “Cytokinin regulated RNA processing feature”1

#### Feature 7: RNA processing Cytokinin Biosynthesis, Transport, and Root-to-Shoot Signaling in Plant Growth Control <a href="#id-15mhyhn5sxkt" id="id-15mhyhn5sxkt"></a>

IPT3, Isopentenyltransferase3, is a cytokinin degradation enzyme that functions in the mitochondrion, chloroplast, nucleus and plastids. Cytokinins are involved in long-distance communication between plant organs and play a crucial role in systemic growth regulation in response to nitrogen availability and atmospheric CO2 content. The spatial distribution of cytokinin biosynthesis genes leads to structural differences in the types of cytokinins transported through the xylem and phloem, with trans-zeatin (tZ) type being especially effective in regulating shoot growth. Additionally, root-to-shoot translocation via the xylem controls different sets of shoot growth traits based on nitrogen availability. Photosynthetically generated sugars also contribute to de novo cytokinin biosynthesis in roots, particularly under elevated CO2 conditions. Cytokinins are not only involved in shoot-to-root signaling but also have a role in nutrient acquisition and root system growth by interacting with other signaling molecules (Reviewed by Sakakibara., 2021). Genetic features associated with RNA degradation pathways provide insights into the post-processing mechanisms that fine-tune gene expression levels and control translation or degradation rates. AT1G14210, is an unnamed Ribonuclease T2 family protein that is involved in RNA cleavage throughout the cells endomembrane system and extracellular region. After transcription messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing can create a range of different transcripts allowing a single loci to produce a range of different proteins. For example, AT4G16920, is another unnamed protein identified in the JADBio Precision model, that is part of the TIR-NBS-LRR class family proteins which are known to be important in pathogen recognition. This particular loci is predicted to have 8 splicing variations and is highly expressed in rapidly elongation tissues including the epidermis of the elongation zone and elongating root hairs. Ribosomes facilitating protein synthesis, messenger RNA is translated into functional proteins through a complex series of steps involving initiation, elongation, and termination. Alterations in ribosome structure or function can have significant implications for protein synthesis efficiency and fidelity. Furthermore, the balance between mRNA degradation and translation is crucial for maintaining appropriate gene expression levels. Both environmental and genetic factors involved in RNA degradation pathways contribute to this fine-tuning process by influencing mRNA stability or turnover rates.

#### &#x20;<a href="#id-1kz78jp11ggb" id="id-1kz78jp11ggb"></a>

#### The Impact of DNA Double-Strand Breaks on Cytokinin Signaling, Auxin Flux, and Cell Cycle Dynamics in Arabidopsis Root Tip Development <a href="#id-79agzev9wkrq" id="id-79agzev9wkrq"></a>

Takahashi et al., (2020) investigate how DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) cause s ATM and SOG1 mediated signaling cascade that induce the expression of genes for the synthesis of cytokinin hormones via induction of IPT3 and IPT5. This enhances the accumulation of cytokinins in the Arabidopsis root tip, and is a programmed response to DSBs through the DNA damage signaling pathway. They showed that activation of cytokinin signaling suppresses the expression of PIN-FORMED genes that encode Auxin efflux carriers, altering the auxin flux and causing cell cycle retardation in the G2 phase. Elevated cytokinin signaling also promotes an early transition from cell division to endoreplication, resulting in a reduction of the root meristem size and increased rates of cellular differentiation. This is also supported by ontology analysis of the feature 2 within the data (10 loci) showing enrichment for a comparison of the root tip _wee1_ KO mutant compared with WT (Cools et al., 2011). The WEE1 kinase has been identified as crucial in delaying cell cycle progression during replication-inhibitory drug treatment which is often used to investigate the developmental checkpoints that they can use to halt the cell cycle when “DNA stress” occurs, allowing for DNA repair before cell division. WEE1 treated with hydroxyurea had an extended S-phase duration, and showed that WEE1 accumulates specifically in replicating nuclei experiencing DNA stress during S phase. In addition to prolonged replication, WEE1-deficient plants exhibited premature vascular differentiation which is essentially an acceleration in the production of dead cells at the end of the meristem.

#### PIF Transcription Factors in Auxin Signaling: A Focus on ABA Interaction, PIN Protein Regulation, and Hormonal Crosstalk" <a href="#i00fwqczqcgt" id="i00fwqczqcgt"></a>

Enrichment analysis highlights PIF3 targets, Transcriptional Regulation: PIF proteins can directly bind to specific DNA sequences known as PBEs (PIF Binding Elements) present in the promoters of target genes. By binding to these elements, PIFs can activate or repress the transcription of various genes involved in different physiological processes, including those related to auxin signaling. Auxin is a key plant hormone that controls numerous aspects of growth and development. The biosynthesis and transport of auxin are tightly regulated processes involving several protein families, including PIN proteins (Liang et al., 2020). Through their regulatory role at the transcriptional level, PIF proteins can modulate the expression levels of genes encoding components involved in auxin biosynthesis or transport systems influencing overall auxin levels within cells or tissues. Liang et al., (2020) investigates the interaction between abscisic acid (ABA) and phytochrome-interacting factor (PIF) transcription factors in light signaling, plant growth development, and adaptation to environmental stimuli. Specifically, it focuses on the role of PIFs in regulating ABA signaling in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings under long-day conditions. The findings suggest that PIFs have a positive regulatory effect on ABA signaling during post-germination seedling growth. Previous study identified the G-box motif as binding site for PIF3 and PIF5. Furthermore, several ABA-responsive genes such as PYL3, PYL6, PYL12, SnRK2.2, CPK4, CPK6, ABI5, ABF3,and KIN1 were found to be potential targets of PIFs and many have been identified as responsive in previous spaceflights (Choi et al., 2019). However, this regulation isn’t just at the transcriptional level due to their indirect effect on PIN proteins. The regulation of PIN proteins by PIFs can ultimately affect auxin distribution patterns, which are critical for various developmental processes such as embryogenesis, organ formation, vascular development, root and shoot growth and tropic responses (phototropism and gravitropism) (Band., 2021). In addition, to their direct effects on gene expression related to auxin metabolism and transport, PIFs also interact with other hormonal signaling pathways such as gibberellins (GA), abscisic acid (ABA), cytokinin, jasmonates (JA), Salicylic acid and ethylene which may further impact PIN protein regulation indirectly.
